Medicines and medication management | National Institute on Aging Skip to main content An official website of the United States government
The .gov means it’s official. Federal government websites often end in .gov or .mil. Before sharing sensitive information, make sure you’re on a federal government site.
The site is secure. The https:// ensures that you are connecting to the official website and that any information you provide is encrypted and transmitted securely.
Health Information A-Z Health Topics Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia Brain Health Caregiving End of Life Exercise and Physical Activity Healthy Eating Español Download Publications (PDF) Infographics Resources for Health Care Professionals
Research &amp; Funding All Research &amp; Funding Blog - Inside NIA Clinical Trials Training &amp; Career Development Grants &amp; Funding Health Disparities Research Research Resources Labs at NIA Division of Aging Biology Division of Behavioral and Social Research Division of Geriatrics and Clinical Gerontology Division of Neuroscience Division of Extramural Activities Quick Links NIA-Specific Funding Policies Small Business Program Alzheimer&#039;s Disease and Related Dementias Funding Announcements Data Sharing Resources for Researchers
News &amp; Events All News &amp; Events News Releases Announcements Events Research Highlights Workshops Multimedia Quick Links Media Inquiries Alzheimer’s &amp; Related Dementias Press Kit
About NIA All About NIA Budget &amp; Testimony Strategic Directions National Advisory Council on Aging (NACA) Advances in Aging and Alzheimer&#039;s Research Staff Directory Careers Student Resources Contact NIA
As you age, you may be taking more medications. It is important to take your medicines correctly and know the possible side effects that may be associated with them. Check out these articles to help you keep track of your medicines and take them safely.
Taking Medicines Safely as You Age Most older adults take several different prescription medications. Learn how to safely take and keep track of your medicines, get tips for communicating with your doctor, and read answers to frequently asked questions.
An official website of the National Institutes of Health