Sleep hygiene is a behavioral and environmental practice developed in the late 1970s as a method to help people with mild to moderate insomnia. Clinicians assess the sleep hygiene of people with insomnia and other conditions, such as depression, and offer recommendations based on the assessment. The techniques, routines, and related products are also called sleepmaxxing on social media.
Sleep hygiene recommendations include establishing a regular sleep schedule, taking no or short naps, not exercising physically (or mentally) too close to bedtime, limiting worry, limiting exposure to light in the hours before sleep, and getting out of bed if sleep does not come. Additionally, use of the bed for anything but sleep and sex, avoiding alcohol (as well as nicotine, caffeine, and other stimulants) in the hours before bedtime, and having a peaceful, comfortable and dark sleep environment, are other hygiene recommendations.


Assessment
Assessment of sleep hygiene includes a clinical interview and self-report questionnaires and sleep diaries, which are typically kept from one to two weeks, to record a representative sample data. There are also computerized assessments such as the Sleep-EVAL system, which can be employed in the diagnostic process. It features 1,543 possible questions automatically selected according to the individual's previous answers.
Practice of sleep hygiene and knowledge of sleep hygiene practices can be assessed with measures such as the Sleep Hygiene Index, Sleep Hygiene Awareness and Practice Scale, or the Sleep Hygiene Self-Test. For younger individuals, sleep hygiene can be assessed by the Adolescent Sleep Hygiene Scale, the Children's Sleep Hygiene Scale, or Tayside children's sleep questionnaire.


Recommendations
Clinicians choose among recommendations for improving sleep quality for each individual.


Sleep schedule
Awakening around the same time every morning and keeping a regular sleep schedule tends to improve sleep.
Getting 7–8 hours of sleep can prevent various physical and mental health deficits, and therefore a top sleep hygiene recommendation is allowing enough time for sleep. Clinicians will frequently advise that these hours of sleep be obtained at night instead of through napping, because while naps can be helpful after sleep deprivation, in the longterm naps may be detrimental to nighttime sleep. Negative effects of napping on sleep and performance have been found to depend on duration and timing, with shorter midday naps being the least disruptive.


Activities
Exercise is an activity that can facilitate or inhibit sleep quality; people who exercise experience better quality of sleep than those who do not, but exercising too late in the day can be activating and delay falling asleep. Increasing exposure to bright and natural light during the daytime and avoiding bright light in the hours before bedtime may help promote a sleep-wake schedule aligned with nature's daily light-dark cycle.
Activities that reduce physiological arousal and cognitive activity promote falling asleep, so engaging in relaxing activities before bedtime is recommended. Conversely, continuing important work activities or planning shortly before bedtime or once in bed has been shown to delay falling asleep. Similarly, good sleep hygiene involves minimizing time spent thinking about worries or anything emotionally upsetting shortly before bedtime. Trying purposefully to fall asleep may induce frustration that further prevents falling asleep, so in such situations a person may be advised to get out of bed and try something else for a brief amount of time.
Generally, for people experiencing difficulties with sleep, spending less time in bed results in deeper and more continuous sleep, so clinicians will frequently recommend eliminating use of the bed for any activities except sleep or sex.


Foods and substances
Avoiding nicotine, caffeine (including coffee, energy drinks, soft drinks, tea, chocolate, and some pain relievers), and other stimulants in the hours before bedtime is recommended by most sleep hygiene specialists, as these substances activate neurobiological systems that maintain wakefulness. Alcohol near bedtime is frequently discouraged by clinicians, because, although alcohol can induce sleepiness initially, the arousal caused by metabolizing alcohol can disrupt and significantly fragment sleep. Smoking tobacco products before bed may reduce one's quality of resting by decreasing the time spent in deep sleep, leading to sleep fragmentation and nocturnal restlessness. Both consumption of a large meal just before bedtime, and hunger have been associated with disrupted sleep; clinicians may recommend eating a light snack before bedtime. Limiting intake of liquids before bedtime can prevent interruptions of sleep due to urination.


Sleep environment
Arranging a sleep environment that is quiet, very dark, and cool is recommended. Noises, light, and uncomfortable temperatures have been shown to disrupt continuous sleep. Other recommendations that are frequently made, though less studied, include selecting comfortable mattresses, bedding, and pillows, and eliminating a visible bedroom clock, to prevent focusing on time passing when trying to fall asleep.
Light exposure when sleeping has been shown to cause ocular fatigue.
In 2015, a systematic review of studies on mattresses concluded that medium-firm, custom-inflated mattresses were best for pain and neutral spinal alignment.


Effectiveness
Sleep hygiene studies use different sets of sleep hygiene recommendations, and the evidence that improving sleep hygiene improves sleep quality is weak and inconclusive as of 2014. Most research on sleep hygiene principles has been conducted in clinical settings, and there is a need for more research on non-clinical populations.
The strength of research support for each recommendation varies; some of the more robustly researched and supported recommendations include the negative effects of noisy sleep environments, alcohol consumption in the hours before sleep, engaging in mentally difficult tasks before sleep, and trying too hard to fall asleep. There is a lack of evidence for the effects of certain sleep hygiene recommendations, including getting a more comfortable mattress, removing bedroom clocks, not worrying, and limiting liquids. Other recommendations, such as the effects of napping or exercise, have a more complicated evidence base. The effects of napping, for example, seem to depend on the length and timing of napping, in conjunction with how much cumulative sleep an individual has had in recent nights.
There is support showing positive sleep outcomes for people who follow more than one sleep hygiene recommendation. There is however no evidence that poor sleep hygiene can contribute to insomnia.
While there is inconclusive evidence that sleep hygiene alone is effective as a treatment for insomnia, some research studies have shown improvement in insomnia for patients who receive sleep hygiene education in combination with cognitive behavioral therapy practices.
The American Academy of Sleep Medicine released in 2021 a meta-analysis on behavioral therapies concluding that they "did not favor the use of sleep hygiene as a stand-alone therapy for chronic insomnia" since "recent evidence shows that it is no longer supported as a single-component therapy". They further recommend educating clinicians and patients to avoid the recommendation of sleep hygiene as this can cause a "delayed implementation of effective therapies with continued or worsening insomnia symptoms" and furthermore may demotivate patients from "undergoing other treatments based on their experience using an ineffective intervention". It was also impossible to conduct a network analysis of the efficacy of specific items of sleep hygiene due to the wide heterogeneity and lack of systematic reporting of content and delivery methods.


Special populations
Sleep hygiene is a central component of cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia. Specific sleep disorders may require other or additional treatment approaches, and continuing difficulties with sleep may require additional assistance from healthcare providers.
College students are at risk of engaging in poor sleep hygiene and also of being unaware of the resulting effects of sleep deprivation. Because of irregular weekly schedules and the campus environment, college students may be likely to have variable sleep-wake schedules across the week, take naps, drink caffeine or alcohol near bedtime, and sleep in disruptive sleeping environments. Because of this, researchers recommend sleep hygiene education on college campuses.  Harvard University, for example, requires all incoming first-year undergraduates to take a short online course on the subject before the fall semester begins.
Similarly, shift workers have difficulty maintaining a healthy sleep-wake schedule due to night or irregular work hours. Shift workers need to be strategic about napping and drinking caffeine, as these practices may be necessary for work productivity and safety, but should be timed carefully. Because shift workers may need to sleep while other individuals are awake, additional sleeping environment changes should include reducing disturbances by turning off phones and posting signs on bedroom doors to inform others when they are sleeping.
Additionally, socioeconomic status (SES) often determines access to care leading to a downward trajectory in health. Those with lower SES have limited access to quality living conditions. Economic status can contribute to tremendous stress. Sleep is the primary mechanism in biological and psychosocial stressors that can help one recover from moderate stress. However, the stress level will affect the brain by disrupting the circadian cycle, meaning that more stress will lead to more sleep disturbances. The data points to an inverse relationship: lower SES will result in insufficient sleep and a decline in sleep quality compared to high SES. Light and noise will significantly impact one's sleeping patterns. Exposure to light will disrupt the body's natural circadian rhythm. In low SES populations, irregular and long work hours may force an individual to attempt to sleep during the day. This will significantly disrupt the physiological benefits that come from sleep. Additionally, urban neighborhoods will likely have greater night noise, crime, and violence. In these neighborhoods, the body will be in a constant state of survival, releasing cortisol and adrenaline, which interfere with sleep.
Due to symptoms of low mood and energy, individuals with depression may be likely to have behaviors that are counter to good sleep hygiene, such as taking naps during the day, consuming alcohol near bedtime, and consuming large amounts of caffeine during the day. In addition to sleep hygiene education, bright light therapy can be a useful treatment for individuals with depression and circadian rhythm disturbances. Not only can morning bright light therapy help establish a better sleep-wake schedule, but it also has been shown to be effective for treating depression directly, especially when related to seasonal affective disorder.
Individuals with breathing difficulties due to asthma or allergies may experience additional barriers to quality sleep that can be addressed by specific variations of sleep hygiene recommendations. Difficulty with breathing can cause disruptions to sleep, reducing the ability to stay asleep and to achieve restful sleep. For individuals with allergies or asthma, additional considerations must be given to potential triggers in the bedroom environment. Medications that might improve ability to breathe while sleeping may also impair sleep in other ways, so there must be careful management of decongestants, asthma controllers, and antihistamines.


Implementation
Sleep hygiene strategies include advice about timing of sleep and food intake in 